Hello and welcome to the Harvest Baptist Church sermon podcast.
We are honored that you would click on this and listen to God's word preached by one of our elders.
At the same time, we strongly affirm the biblical mandate for Christians to be faithfully active and in-person part of their local church.
This sermon cannot and will not replace what a local church can provide to the life of a Christian.
That being said,
We hope that this sermon challenges and encourages you in your faith, and that it builds upon the faithful ministry of your local church.
We hope that you enjoy.
God bless.
If you have our Bibles, if you open them to Exodus chapter 12, Exodus 12, as we continue through our journey through Exodus, which we've entitled from slavery to Sabbath.
We find ourselves this morning
And one of those few places in scripture that we stand back and recognize is truly one of the great mountaintops of human history, not just of the Bible.
So this morning, we recognize that the text that we deal with is one of great import and one that certainly shapes the course of the rest of human history.
And so this morning, if you have your Bibles, if you will stand with me as we read God's Word, Exodus,
Chapter number 12.
The Lord said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, this month shall be for you the beginning of months.
It shall be the first month of the year for you.
Tell all the congregation of Israel that on the 10th day of this month, every man shall take a lamb according to their father's houses, a lamb for a household.
And if the household is too small for a lamb, then he and
His nearest neighbor shall take according to the number of persons according to what each can eat.
So what each can eat, you shall make your count for the lamb.
Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male, a year old.
You may take it from the sheep of the goats and you shall keep it until the 14th day of the month when the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill their lambs at twilight.
Then they shall take some of the blood and put it on the two doorposts and the lentil of the houses in which they eat it.
They shall eat the flesh that night roasted on the fire with unleavened bread and bitter herbs.
They shall eat it.
Do not eat any of it raw or boiled in water, but roasted its head with its legs and its inner parts.
And you shall let none of it remain until the morning.
Anything that remains until the morning, you shall burn.
In this manner, you shall eat it with your belt fastened, your sandals on your feet, and your staff in your hand.
And you shall eat it in haste for it is the Lord's Passover.
For I will pass through the land of Egypt that night, and I will strike all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast.
And on the gods of Egypt, I will execute judgments.
I and the Lord.
The blood shall be a sign for you.
on the houses where you are.
And when I see the blood, I will pass over you and no plague will befall you to destroy you.
When I strike the land of Egypt, this day shall be a sign.
I'm sorry.
This day shall be for you a memorial day and you shall keep it as a feast to the Lord throughout your generations as a statute forever.
You shall keep it as a feast.
Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread.
On the first day you shall remove leaven out of your houses, for if anyone eats what is leavened from the first day until the seventh day, that person shall be cut off from Israel.
On the first day you shall hold a holy assembly, and on the seventh day a holy assembly.
No work shall be done on those days, but what everyone needs to eat, that alone may be prepared by you.
And you shall observe the feast of unleavened bread for on this very day I brought your hosts out of the land of Egypt.
Therefore you shall observe this day throughout your generations as a statute forever.
And the first month of the 14th day from the 14th day of the month at evening, you shall eat unleavened bread until the 21st day of the month at evening.
For seven days, no leaven is to be found in your houses.
If anyone eats what is leaven, that person will be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he is a sojourner or a native of the land.
You shall eat nothing leavened in all your dwelling places.
You shall eat unleavened bread.
Then Moses called all the elders of Israel and said to them, go and select lambs for yourselves according to your clans and kill the Passover lamb.
Take a bunch of hyssop and dip it in the blood that is in the basin and touch it to the lentil and the two door posts with the blood that is in the basin.
None of you shall go out of the door until of his house until the morning for the Lord will pass through to strike the Egyptians.
And when he sees the blood on the lentil and on the two door posts, the Lord will pass over the door and will not allow the destroyer to enter your houses to strike you.
You shall observe this right as a statute for you and for your sons forever.
And when you come into the land that the Lord will give you, he, as he has promised, you shall keep this service.
And when your children say to you, what do you mean by this service?
You shall say it is the sacrifice of the Lord's Passover, for he passed over the houses of the people of Israel and Egypt.
When he struck the Egyptians, but spared our houses and the people bowed their heads and worshiped.
Then the people of Israel went out and did so.
As the Lord had commanded Moses and Aaron,
So they did.
At midnight, the Lord struck down all the firstborn in the land of Egypt from the firstborn of Pharaoh, who sat on his throne to the firstborn of the captive who was in the dungeon and the firstborn of all the livestock.
And Pharaoh rose up in the night and he
and all his servants and all the Egyptians.
And there was a great cry in Egypt for there was not a house where someone was not dead.
Then he summoned Moses and Aaron by night and said, up, go out from among my people, both of you and the people of Israel and go and serve the Lord.
As you have said, take your flocks and your herds as you have said and be gone and bless me also.
The Egyptians were urgent.
with the people to send them out of the land in haste for they said, we shall all be dead.
So the people took their dome before it was 11, their kneading bowls and bound up their cloaks on their shoulders.
The people of Israel had also done as Moses told them for they had asked the Egyptians for silver and gold jewelry and for clothing.
And the Lord had given the people favor in the side of the Egyptians so that they let them have what they asked.
Thus they plundered.
the Egyptians and the people of Israel journeyed from Ramses to Succath about 600,000 men on foot besides women and children.
A mixed multitude also went up with them and very much livestock both flocks and herds and they baked unleavened cakes of the dough that they had brought out of Egypt for it was not leavened because they were thrust out of Egypt and could not wait nor had they prepared any provisions
for themselves.
The time that the people of Israel had lived in Egypt was 430 years at the end of 430 years.
On that very day, all the hosts of the Lord went out from the land of Egypt.
It was a night of watching by the Lord to bring them out of the land of Egypt.
So this same night is a night of watching kept to the Lord by all the people of Israel throughout their generations.
Let's pray, Father.
Thank you for your word.
God, thank you.
for what you did on that night in Egypt.
Thank you, God, for providing an example to your people that you are a redeeming God.
God, help us to see this morning your sovereign, redeeming nature.
And God, help us to glory in the fact that our redemption is found nowhere else other than you.
We pray this in your name.
Amen.
Maybe see that.
It's a lengthy passage.
This morning I want to simply go through and look at four aspects of it together and then a couple of closing marks at the end.
First thing I want to look at is the prescription of Passover.
At length, what we have in this passage, in this passage in a lot of ways is different from the other plagues.
In the other plagues, there's very little detail given, but in this passage, God goes into great detail and gives his people much detail about what they are to do.
And what we see in this passage is, again, much detail about what they are to do to get ready for this last and ultimate plague that God is going to give on behalf of his people in the land of Egypt.
And so what is the prescription?
Well, the prescription, as we are all familiar with, is that on the 10th day of the month, they are to select a lamb.
That they are to select a lamb for specific people.
that they are to select a lamb that was to be selected based on the size of the number of people so that all the meat could be eaten by a family in one night.
So go out and pick a lamb that your family can eat in one night.
If your family isn't big enough to eat a whole lamb, go to your neighbor's house and you and your neighbor go in together and buy the lamb together.
The implication here is also if your family's not wealthy enough to buy a lamb, go to your neighbor's house and put your money together and buy a lamb.
by a lamb that all of you can eat though in one night.
It's a lamb purchased, a lamb selected for specific people so that they could all eat it in one night.
We see in verse four, this odd prescription.
And if the household is too small for a lamb, then he and his nearest neighbor shall take according to the number of persons, according to what each can eat.
So you shall make your count for the lamb.
What we see here is God's intention in the Passover
is that nothing be left over, that careful considerations be made so that the entire lamb is consumed, so that there are no leftovers.
This is very different than the holiday we just celebrated.
I'm sure many of you, as you prepared for your Christmas dinners, as I did, you planned the meat so that there would be leftovers, because there's nothing better than the next day having a sandwich of whatever the meat was that you had the day of Christmas.
That's not what God intended for this celebration.
Because where they were, the night of this celebration was not going to be where they were going to be the next day.
There was to be nothing left over.
One commentator put it this way, everyone had to eat the meat, and all the meat had to get eaten.
Everyone had to participate in the meal, and none of the meal could be left over.
So they were to go and select this lamb for their specific family or the families that they were going to be with that evening.
But also God gives to his people specific qualities that they are to look for when selecting this lamb.
This lamb was to famously be without blemish.
This was to be a male lamb.
This was to be a lamb that was a year old.
This would make sense.
Passover happened in the spring of the year.
The birthing season for livestock is generally in the spring.
And so the animal that would have been selected would have been last year's new births from last year's
a new burst that would have happened in the year before.
This might seem to be an arbitrary or at least a very oddly specific set of qualities that God asks.
But the obvious reality is this, that there's a spiritual significance to what God is requiring.
God is requiring a perfect sacrifice.
God is requiring the best of the best.
God is requiring a lamb, not just any lamb, but a lamb without spot or blemish.
a lamb that has no imperfection so that the sacrifice that is about to be made can be one worthy of his attention.
It was as perfect a sacrifice as one could have made.
There was to be no blemish, the best of the best.
And when you think about lambs, that's one thing, but then you realize that he also includes goats in this.
And my wife wants goats and I've been looking at goats and I hate to break it to you, but goats are some ugly creatures.
All of them have blemishes.
They're all ugly.
They all have eyes that go different ways.
They all have horns that are longer than the other.
And so what God is asking for here is a perfect sacrifice.
But the less obvious significance of this was that it wasn't just a perfect sacrifice, but that it was a perfect sacrifice.
What God is asking of His people would have truly cost them something.
God is not just asking for one of their herd.
God is asking that they give the male without blemish who's a year old.
What's the significance of this?
This would have been the one animal that no family would have wanted to kill.
It would have been the cherished prize of the previous year's newborn herd.
Females were basically all kept for breeding.
They weren't eight eaten.
Males were selectively
chosen to be kept for breeding and the rest then were eaten.
What is God then asking?
That the goat or the lamb with the best genetics, the goat or the lamb that they would have most wanted to keep to improve their herd's genetics is the one that they're gonna give up.
This is the lamb that would have cost them the most.
It's not just that it is the spiritual significance of it being a holy lamb, it is a costly sacrifice.
This would have cost them the bloodline of their herd.
This would have mean choosing a less desirable lamb to be the mate for the future of their herd.
This would have meant them sacrificing potentially the well-being of their herd because goats, if you don't know, are very prone to illness.
And goats are very, very carefully bred so that illnesses are not brought into their line.
And so by choosing the spotless one, you're opening up the bloodline
of the future of your herd to all the more sickness, to all the more deficiencies, to all the more abnormalities.
Would you want the lame, blind, and derpy looking goat, or do you want the sturdy, healthy looking one to breed?
What do you want to generate the bloodline for your flock?
God says, that's the one that I want you to kill.
That's the goat that I want you to sacrifice on that night and to eat.
I mean, he wants them to do this because on the 14th day of the month, he tells them that there's going to be a meal to be had.
He tells them that they're going to kill this goat and they're going to put the blood of the goat over the doorpost, right?
It says put the blood down each side of the doorpost and over the lentil.
In modern building language, that would be the header, right?
It's the beam that goes across the top of the door.
So surround the door with the blood of this perfect sacrifice.
And then when I come, I will pass over your house on account of the blood.
But lest we forget, it wasn't just the blood that mattered.
It was also a meal that went along with this.
It wasn't just the spreading of the blood across the door.
God also desired for them to partake in a covenant meal as part of this celebration.
So as a meal designed,
for being ready to leave.
Did you notice that as we read the text?
I'm sure you noticed maybe that it was odd that they were instructed in terms of how they were to eat it.
They were asked to eat with their belt on and their shoes on and with their staff in their hand.
This would have not been customary to be done in a house.
When you went in your house, you took off your belt, you took off your sandals, you laid down your robe, you lounged to eat.
But what has God instructed the people of Israel to do?
He says, eat it and be ready to go.
Why does God do that?
Because what is God ultimately promising?
God is ultimately promising their deliverance.
He is ultimately promising that they will be delivered from the hands of the Egyptians.
And so he knows that by ordering them into this meal that he needs to have them ready for what is next to come.
He needs to have them ready so that they're not waiting, by the way, on the bread to rise.
That's why unleavened bread is given.
It was not
customary in that time to eat unleavened bread all cultures during this time used yeast and fermented dough aka sourdough to Be eaten during this day and in this Passover meal God forbid both of those Sorry ladies.
No sourdough was eaten at Passover didn't happen Only unleavened bread only bread that could be quickly made quickly prepared and then moved on from could be eaten Also, he said bitter herbs
This is a commonly available side dish that was eaten at the time that could have been roasted on the fire or eaten raw.
So it could have been quickly prepared and it was readily available.
They didn't have to go looking for it.
They would have likely already had it in their homes.
It was commonly eaten.
And so it was something readily available that was quick to prepare.
And then you have the preparation of the lamb itself.
The lamb was to be cooked whole, head and all, right?
says cooked with all of its insides.
This is not to say that the lamb was not cleaned.
The guts were likely removed, right?
It was field dressed, if you will.
It was simply cleaned, but all the other organs were left to be consumed the night of the meal.
So the liver, the heart, every other edible organ would have been left in the animal and cooked whole as part of the feast.
And it was cooked over a fire.
Why is that?
Well, because cooking meat over a fire is the fastest way to cook it.
There's no pots and pans to clean up from.
There's no mess in the kitchen to deal with later.
It's one of the greatest things I love about cooking on my grill.
I don't have to do dishes later.
It's what exactly God has in mind here for the people of Israel.
He's saying, have a barbecue because you won't have to do dishes because guess what?
You're not gonna have time for dishes.
You're gonna be on the move.
So be ready to move.
He even says this.
He says, don't eat it raw.
That's not safe.
Don't be silly.
You're gonna be in a hurry but don't be in that big of a hurry.
Right?
Don't kill yourself.
Don't eat the meat raw, but also don't eat it boiled.
This would have been one of the other customary quick ways of cooking meat was creating a big pot of water and boiling the meat.
But why does God say don't cook it boiled?
He says that because guess what?
That creates more of a mess than just cooking it over a fire.
You have to wait for the water to boil.
You have to then wait for the meat to cook in the water.
Then you have to drain the water and eat the meat.
Then you have to clean the pot that you've cooked the meat in.
All of this would have been too laborious for what God had in mind.
God knew that their exodus was soon coming and would be quickly upon them and at hand.
This was a meal meant to be eaten on the run with no leftovers, with nothing left.
And if there was anything left, they were to burn it, get rid of it.
Nothing left.
There was to be no time to pack a sack lunch for later.
Eat it, be done with it.
That was God's message to his people.
It's important to note here also of how there was an individual and corporate nature of this feast.
All of them were to eat of the meat.
All of them were to personally respond to God's call here.
All of them had a personal responsibility to by faith participate in the feast.
All of them had a personal response to enter into a house that had blood over the doorposts.
All of them were commanded to eat of it.
All of them were commanded to taste of it, to participate in it.
But it wasn't just an individual feast.
God didn't tell them to go down to the local corner store and get lamb kebabs, right?
That might have been quicker.
That's not what God commanded.
God commanded for them to corporately have this meal together.
They were to do it as a family.
And if their family wasn't large enough or wealthy enough to be able to afford what he was asking, they were do it together with other families close to them.
They were to share the land with their family and potentially their neighbors as there was need.
There was to be no one alone.
No one can eat a whole lamb by themselves.
No one can go out and get a lamb and put it over their doorpost.
If you were a single person in this day and you lived in a place by yourself, you could not go out and get a lamb and then go to your home and do this by yourself.
God intended for you to find someone else to do it with.
This was not an individualistic practice.
God commanded it be done together.
God's
intention here was for them to partake in this meal together so they can together see his faithfulness displayed and together experience his grace extended through their redemption through their faith in his word.
As we continue on through the passage as Moses there in the latter parts of the first section of the narrative here, God reveals what is going to happen
on the night that this is all to take place.
But I don't want to get ahead of ourselves.
I don't want to get there yet.
We're going to talk about the payoff of the Passover eventually.
But we've now talked about the prescription of the Passover.
What exactly is to happen?
What are they to do on that night?
I want to take a second now and circle back and simply acknowledge the importance the Lord places on this by noting the prominence of the Passover.
The Passover to God was an important thing.
Okay.
Passover is not just something that Israel has made important.
Right.
Passover is not just something that Jewish people say is important.
Passover is something that God said was important.
Listen to what he says again in the first part of the chapter, starting in verse 12.
The Lord said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, this month shall be for you the beginning of months.
It shall be the first month of the year for you, tell all the congregation of Israel that on the 10th day of this month, every man shall take a lamb according to his father's houses, blah, blah, blah, so on and so forth.
What does God tell him?
He says, Moses and Aaron, your calendar is about to change.
What I'm about to do is so important, I'm commanding you to reorient your entire year around it.
What I'm about to do is so radical, so important for the life
of your people that you're going to celebrate this as the beginning of your year.
Have you ever asked yourself why do we celebrate New Year on January 1?
Why not March 1?
Why not December 1?
Have you ever asked that question?
Have you ever thought about that?
Well, just to encourage you and maybe burn your conscience a little bit this week as you go and kiss your loved one on New Year's Eve at midnight, January 1 is the beginning of the New Year because it was originally celebrated as a
honoring of the Roman god Janus, who January is named for.
Julius Caesar in the year 45 officially installed January 1 as the beginning of the year, recognizing Janus, who was the god of beginnings, as the beginning of the year.
And that the beginning of the year was to start with a celebration to this god of beginnings.
So now we have two years, where we all go out and party and celebrate and watch the ball drop.
That's why we celebrate January 1st.
God tells his people, you are going to celebrate this because I am going to do something great.
It's important here to know who changes the calendar, right?
God does it.
God tells them to change the calendar.
Moses does not change the calendar.
Moses doesn't take an aside here in his narrative and say, hey, by the way, this is why we changed our celebration of the new year, right?
That's might be what you would have expected, but that's not what happens.
We also don't later find out that the priest changed the calendar to reflect this important historical event.
God does it.
God preemptively does it.
Before it even happened, God tells them, hey, listen, this is going to be so important.
This is such a big deal for the life of your people.
Your whole existence, your whole time structure is going to shift because of it.
God is teaching them.
in this to order their lives according to the redemptive work that he is going to accomplish.
But God doesn't just reorient the calendar.
He also instructs them to re-observe the celebration twice throughout this passage.
We read how God instructs them that every year they are to re-observe this feast.
We see that God instructs them to have this feast of unleavened bread.
It was to be a feast for the generations, a statute forever.
This feast of Unleavened Bread.
Again, the emphasis here being on the quickness of the leaving that God delivered them, that it wasn't themselves who delivered them, that they had to leave quickly, that God was the one who delivered them.
God didn't just change the calendar.
He instituted an ordinance of an annual feast.
He tells them, do this to remember what I have done for you.
And by the way, don't take it wrongly.
He says, watch out.
Don't.
Don't go down the road of thinking you can sneak some leaven in.
Why does he say that?
He says, because if you do, you will be cut off from Israel.
What is he saying?
This is not so much as this phrase is used
throughout the Pentateuch.
It's not so much talking about an instruction for Israel to cut those people off, as it is frequently used elsewhere, as it is in this place a prophetic warning of the reality of faithlessly rejecting God's design in the feast.
God is saying, if you faithlessly refuse to obey my commandments, you will be cut off.
He's not saying if you're found to be doing this, then your neighbors need to get you out, as he does elsewhere.
That happens elsewhere in the Pentateuch, in the law.
God says, hey, if you find your neighbor doing this, cut that person out.
It's not what God says here.
God says here, if you try to sneak Levin into this feast, you will be cut off because of your faithfulness.
You will be cut off because you're not being obedient.
God also tells him that this feast was to be perpetual, to teach their children.
He uses the example in verse 26.
When your children ask you about why are you observing this feast, that this is a teaching opportunity for you, that they are to use this as an opportunity to teach of God's faithfulness and of his redemptive work in the Passover evening.
Why is all of this so important?
Why is God focused so much about the quickness of it?
and that they remember God every year.
Why is all of this so important?
Well, this is all so important because of what happens as a result of the Passover.
It's also important because of what God actually does.
It's also important because God doesn't just hypothesize something miraculous and then it kind of sort of comes to fruition.
It's miraculous because God tells them what's going to happen and then he does it.
And by the way, here's what doesn't happen.
Here's what doesn't happen in the Passover.
We read in the passage that there's roughly 600,000 military aged men in verse 37.
What doesn't happen in the Passover is that the might of Israel delivers them from the Egyptians.
The 600,000 man army, which by the way, it's very clear that that's what Moses is trying to communicate here.
The language that Moses uses in this text is very military in the way he numbers them and saying that even down to the way that the number 600,000 is given in our English translations, that comes from a military understanding of the Hebrew language.
Also the term host here, the host of Israel is used.
That's not just a term for a group of people.
That's a military numbering.
That's a military numbering of people.
So Moses is very clearly here communicating that there was an army, right?
There was an army of people, but what doesn't happen is that army doesn't rise up.
Those people don't band together and set out into a military activity.
The people of Israel don't band together and take arms and take back their freedom.
That's not what happens.
This passage again is very clear.
God has an army of his people, but they do nothing but slay a couple of their best livestock, which needless to say is not exactly revolutionary.
That's not exactly what you would expect of a powerful, revolutionary army.
Let me tell you what else doesn't happen.
Pharaoh does not look at this army and say, Oh no,
I've got to get you out of here or else you're going to overthrow my army.
In fact, the exact opposite of that has been happening this whole time.
It is well documented in ancient Egyptian military philosophy to enslave people and bring them to Egypt so that the people they conquered couldn't rise up on the fringes of the empire and start a revolt that would lead to the downfall of the empire.
So Pharaoh would go out, hey, would conquer the armies, and then they would bring the conquered peoples to Egypt.
Why?
To control them, to keep them from uprising.
And so when Pharaoh says, no, I'm not gonna let you go, he has that in mind.
He has in mind, I'm not letting you go because there's 600,000 of you.
If I let you go and you go out there and you join with that culture and that culture, next thing you know, y'all's army is bigger than my army.
I'm not letting that happen.
So what's not happening is
Pharaoh is not afraid.
Israel is not seen as mighty.
So what does happen?
God happens, right?
Who delivers Israel?
God does.
And he does so in a way that only he could get the credit.
There was no time for an organized military assault.
You know how we know that?
There was not even time for dinner, right?
They had no time even to clean up the dishes.
There was no way Israel could have had any time to plan this on their own.
There was no way they could have had any time to make this happen some secret way and then give God the credit for it.
There was no way they could have taken any credit for this at all.
God revealed to his people that he would take action and that he would be the one to deliver them from the hand of the Egyptians.
And that is exactly what he does.
We see it over and over in this passage.
Look at verse 12 with me.
Verse 12, he's gotten done talking about what they are to do leading up to the Passover.
And then he says at the end of verse 11, it is the Lord's Passover.
Who's the one going to be passing over?
It is the Lord.
Verse 12, for I will pass through the land of Egypt that night and I will strike all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast.
And on all the gods of Egypt, I will execute judgments.
I am the Lord.
The blood shall be assigned for you on the house where you are.
And when I see the blood,
I will pass over you and no plague will befall you to destroy you when I strike the land of Egypt.
Look down at verse 17 and you shall observe the feast of unleavened bread for on this very day.
I brought your hosts out of the land of Egypt.
God here says, I brought your army out.
You had an army.
You maybe could have staged uprising.
You didn't.
I did.
Verse 23.
For the Lord will pass through to strike the Egyptians, and when he sees the blood on the lentil and on the two-door post, the Lord will pass over the door and will not allow the destroyer to enter your houses to strike you.
Verse 25.
And when you come into the land that the Lord will give you.
So even after this, the Lord is the one doing it.
It's not that they're going to go and win a land that
It's that the Lord is going to give them a land.
Verse 27, you shall say it.
It is the sacrifice of the Lord's Passover for he passed over the houses of the people of Israel and Egypt.
When he struck the Egyptians, you get the point.
We could go on.
There's several other examples here.
But the point is this, that in the Passover, God monergistically acts for his people.
What I mean by that is God alone acts.
It's not synergism.
God is not working with Israel, right?
God is not cooperating with Israel to bring about their redemption.
He could have done that.
That's not what happens here.
God and God alone acts of his own behalf, of his own will and of his own desire by his own power to bring about the redemption of his people.
And you might say, wait a second, Nate, they had to obey.
The people of Israel had to put the thing over the doorpost, the blood over the doorpost, or God would have killed them.
You're talking about the content idol worshiping slaves that were content living in a land not their own.
Those people, they had to obey.
Let me remind you who they were.
They were exactly that.
They were content where they were.
They were living in a land that was not their own.
They were slaves.
They were helpless.
They were under ruthless authority and likely they were given over to the idols of the Egyptians.
But God gave them a leader.
God gave them a voice.
God gave them an audience with Pharaoh.
God supernaturally enacted nine other plagues that led up to this to awaken their dead souls to his drawing for the coming redemption.
He then, after all that, then he tells them what he's about to do to open their eyes to it.
And some people will really sit here and say, Israel just stumbled into the right choice.
Dear friend, that's not at all what happens in the story.
God does it.
Why is Israel faithful?
Because God does it.
Why does Israel make...
The text is clear.
It seems that all of them obey.
There's no indication here that any Israelis die.
No Jews die here.
Why?
Because God does it.
Because God redeems his people.
It seems that all of them obey, or at least practically all of them do.
That's a miracle in and of itself.
Keep in mind, this is the same people that in just a few chapters are going to be complaining and wanting to go back into slavery.
How is it that God could bring this people to do that just by chance?
It doesn't happen.
God had to do it.
God brings about their obedience so that he and he alone can deliver them.
He also provides for their upcoming journey through providentially causing the Egyptians to fear what might happen if the Israelites stay.
He had turned the greatest nation on earth at the time into a nation cowering like an unarmed homeowner against an armed robber.
Take whatever you want.
Just get out of here and don't kill anyone.
Think of that.
Think of the greatest nation on earth at the time cowering to its slaves.
How does that happen?
God, it's the only answer we have.
It's the only way we could possibly explain it.
God did it.
Yahweh, the faithful, sovereign, covenant making God of Israel did it.
And he did it for his people.
The payoff here is very clear.
It wasn't just that Egypt was overthrown.
God had been systematically doing that throughout the other parables.
And while that is certainly an element, it is not the ultimate reason why God achieves the Passover.
Look it back at the end of verse 11.
He says, it is the Lord's Passover.
For I will pass through the land of Egypt that night, and I will strike the firstborn of the land of Egypt, both man and beast.
And on the gods of Egypt, I will execute judgments for I am Lord.
He's telling them what he's going to do.
The blood will be a sign for you on the houses where you are.
And when I see the blood, I will pass over you and no plague will befall you to destroy you when I strike the land of Egypt.
Why is God doing all of this?
to execute judgments on Egypt and it's God's yes, but keep reading.
God is doing this so that he can do it for his people.
The blood is not for Egypt to see their good works.
It's not for Egypt to see who is God's people and who is not.
It's not even for God to see their good works.
It's not even so that God can know that they're righteous.
God does not need blood on a door to know that.
God does not need blood on a door to know that the people are his people.
God is all-knowing.
God does not need the sign.
What does he say?
The sign is for you.
The blood is for you to see the blood, experience the cost of this redemption I'm about to provide.
The meal was for them.
They had to eat the whole lamb to taste the costly sacrifice God had ordained on their behalf.
They had to eat it to exercise the faith that God had given them and more fully experienced the grace that he was offering them in the Passover.
The memorial was for them.
The continuing celebration of this was for them.
God didn't need a reminder.
God didn't need a calendar reminder to recount his own faithfulness.
But he knew a people prone to wander wood.
He knew that his ultimate plans were to come to fruition.
He would need to give Israel every opportunity to strengthen their faith through the various signs and feasts that he would give to them on top of this one.
So God gives them the Passover for them.
God ultimately goes in, God and God alone goes in, slays the firstborn just as he told Egypt would happen in chapter 11.
He tells him it's going to happen.
It happens in chapter 12.
God does it.
God's very clear that he alone does it.
And before we get to the point of Passover, there's a potential problem that I think we need to discuss.
And I want to caveat it by saying it's not a real problem.
It's just a potential one.
Atheists and liberal theologians alike, though sadly I repeat myself, often look to the events that are about to come to pass in the promised land with the conquest of the various peoples and bring up the classic problem of evil.
How could a good God allow bad things to happen to good people?
They go to what happens in Canaan, right?
If you have conversations with people about this problem of evil, that's where they go.
Well, how could God tell His people to go and commit all these atrocities?
That's where they go.
Or maybe you've heard it put this way, as I have in conversations with unbelievers.
I could never follow a God that commands His people to kill or wipe out entire civilizations.
As I was studying, I couldn't help but wonder
why I've never seen or heard anybody come to this text with that question.
Because again, who's the one that does the killing here?
God doesn't command Israel to kill the Egyptians.
God himself doesn't.
If you're going to put God on a hook, here it is, if you're going to.
You're not going to, by the way.
But if you were going to try, here would be where you might look.
But even here, you would be wrong in doing so.
You would fail.
in doing so.
And before we jump to our well rehearsed and true responses of well, there are not really any good people.
Those are good responses.
That is the right response that there is no one good.
That is a true response.
But before we get there, this morning, I just want us all to stop and feel that tension.
Would you stop and consider what happened on the night of Passover?
Would you stop and feel the tension of your lost friends and family members who might ask this question?
The text is clear.
God doesn't send Satan to kill the sons.
God doesn't send a disease to kill them.
God passes from house to house an exact divine vengeance on Egypt for his people himself.
And so the question could be asked, how could God do that?
How could God go and kill those innocent sons?
How could a holy God do that?
Why would a holy God do that?
Might I suggest a better question for us to ponder this morning in response, one that is worth the voting our lives' attention to?
After all, the answer to the previous question, though hard to grapple with, is simple.
There is no one good.
God's justice truly was delivered that night, but true justice would have been not just the total annihilation of Egypt, but the total annihilation of all mankind that night.
That's what would have been fair that night.
What would have been fair that night is if God took out Egypt, Israel, and everyone else with them.
That's what we deserve.
That's what I deserve.
But the question that needs posing brings us to the heart of the point of the Passover.
The question is not how God could kill the firstborn males from a nation that opposed them at every turn to this point in the story.
And by the way, those children were not innocent, they were sinners.
Their family, sinners, Pharaoh, a sinner.
The question comes some 1500 years later, and that is, how could God send His perfect spotless Son, the Lamb of God, to die on a Roman cross at the hands of the nation He delivered from Egypt?
How could God do that?
That's the question that deserves our lives' attention this morning.
That's the question that this text begs of our minds and our attentions this morning is, how could God send His Son, the Lamb of God, to the cross for us?
How is that fair?
I know me.
I'm not worthy of that.
That's the question that doesn't make any human sense.
You see, the lambs that were killed on the first Passover and every Passover thereafter for 1500 years were just the shadow of the better lamb that was to come.
A lamb whose blood could actually redeem a people.
A lamb whose blood would actually satisfy the wrath of God on account of sins.
Romans chapter one, verse 16, tells us of the gospel of Jesus and that this gospel is the power of God unto salvation.
But what is that gospel?
The gospel is simply this, that God sent his son Jesus to be the lamb of God for us on the cross.
It is the power of God unto salvation.
We read later in Romans 3 that none of us is good.
No, not one.
None of us seek him.
We read later in Romans 3 that we all sin and fall short of the mark of his perfection.
And in light of all of this, we get to Romans 5 and Paul writes this, God shows his love for us and that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
You see, 1500 years later, God sent a Passover lamb on our behalf, who, by the way, would take a Passover meal with his people, his disciples, and instruct them to do so in remembrance of him, which we still observe today as communion.
He then would go to a cross, die for the sins of his people to redeem a people back to God for his glory, for his honor, and for his praise.
Why does God do that?
Because Romans 6-23, the wages of sin is death.
Our sin has a consequence.
There is no forgiveness of sins without the shedding of blood.
It cannot happen.
Our sin has a price that has to be paid.
And then we get to
Romans chapter eight verses one through four, and we get this as his paraphrase, God and Jesus fulfilled the law, which condemns us and our slavery to sin.
And through the work of his son, we are no longer condemned.
We are no longer slaves.
We have been redeemed.
That is the message of the gospel.
And then all of that is summarized and summed up in one of the climatic moments of the book of Romans in chapter eight, starting in verse 31, what then shall we say to these things?
If God is for us, who can be against us?
Think about Israel.
Think about the Passover.
Here they have God's promise deliverance, and they respond when Moses in the text comes to them and says, hey, here's what you're going to do, and here's what God's going to do.
What do they do?
They bow down in worship.
Why?
Because if God's for them, who can be against them?
We should say the same thing.
If God is for us, who can be against us?
He who did not spare his own son.
but gave him up for us all, how will he not also with him graciously give us all things?
Who shall bring any charge against God's elect?
It is God's who justifies.
Who is to condemn?
Christ Jesus is the one who died.
In other words, who's to condemn us to death?
Because Jesus died for our behalf and he continues, Christ Jesus who died, more than that, who is raised, who is at the right hand of God.
Jesus didn't just die on a cross, he's now the judge.
Who can condemn us then?
Who can continue to put us under the punishment of sin?
No one.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
Verse 34, 35, shall tribulation or distress or persecution or famine or nakedness or danger or sword.
As it is written, for your sake, we are being killed all the day long.
We are regarded as sheep to be slaughtered.
No.
And all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us.
For I am sure that neither death nor life
nor angels, nor rulers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor anything else in all creation will be able to separate us from the love of God and Christ Jesus, our Lord.
So what is the point of Passover?
The point of Passover is simply this, that our God is a redeeming God and that he alone redeems.
It is not based on any of our own actions.
We are sinners.
We are unworthy.
God does it.
and He does it for His glory and for our good.
Turn with me if you will to Revelation 4.
We'll end here this morning Revelation 4.
John is having his vision of heaven and as he's
Sorry, that's a type of Revelation chapter five.
As he's having this vision, he sees the scroll and there's great sorrow because no one is found who's worthy to open the scroll.
And then he hears of this lion of the tribe of Judah who's going to come and open the scroll.
This would have been what the Jewish audience would have expected, this great messianic power, right?
This great military ruler who would have come in the name of the Lord to save his people.
And certainly Jesus does that.
Certainly Jesus is the lion
of the tribe of Judah.
But then he turns and sees what is maybe more accurate of Jesus.
Verse six, in between the throne he saw the four living creatures among the elders.
I saw a lamb standing as though it had been slain with seven horns and with seven eyes and with seven spirits of God sent out into all the earth.
And he went and took the scroll from the hand of him who was seated on the throne.
And when he had taken the scroll, the four living creatures and the 24 elders fell down before the lamb, each holding a harp and golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints, and they sang a new song.
Worthy are you to take the scroll and to open its seals.
For you were slain and by your blood you ransomed a people
For God, from every tribe and language and people and nation, and you have made them together a kingdom and priests to our God and they shall reign on the earth.
Dear friend, Jesus is the lamb that met the criteria that God had set.
He fulfilled the Old Testament prophecies of the coming Messiah.
He came to this earth.
He lived a sinless life.
He died on a cross.
He rose again.
and is now seated at the right hand of God, the only one worthy of ruling with God for all of eternity.
Why?
To redeem a people for himself.
The only logical answer to the question that I asked earlier, how could it be that God would send his son to be the Lamb of God is this.
He did it for his glory.
He did it because it would bring him praise and he did it for the benefit of his people.
but that doesn't even seem to really satisfy the, the bigness of that question.
So what should our response be to such a great mystery?
My, I suggest that it's the same response of the 24 elders, same response for that matter of Israel, when they heard what was going to happen to worship.
The point of Passover is that God's people whom he has redeemed might praise his matchless name.
Really quick, I wanna read Psalms 113.
This is from the Halal, which is the section of Psalms that was to be sung on the feast days.
And this particular Psalm was too intended to be sung before the Passover meal.
And this is what God gives to his people as a song to be sung before the meal.
Praise the Lord.
Praise O servants of the Lord.
Praise the name of the Lord.
Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth and forevermore.
From the rising of the sun to its setting, from the name of the Lord is to be praised.
The Lord is high above all nations, His glory above all the heavens.
Who is like the Lord our God, who is seated on high?
Who looks far down on the earth?
Who looks far down on heavens and on the earth?
He raises the poor from the dust and lifts the needy from the ash heap to make them sit with princes, with the princes of His people.
He gives the barren woman a home, making her the joyous mother of children.
praise the Lord.
So what's the point of Passover?
The point of Passover is that God's people would praise him.
That God would redeem a people to praise him.
And God does just that and God alone does just that in this text.
So this morning if you're here and you're a believer, your response this morning is simply this, to praise, to wonder and exalt the Lord the fact that he has redeemed you.
Praise the Lord.
What other response do we have?
If you're here this morning and you're not a believer, AKA, you've never turned from your sin and put your trust in the Lord alone.
Let me ask you this one question as I close.
What if just one Jew?
What if just one of them had not heeded the warning?
What if just one family said, you know what?
I don't have time for that today.
I'll do that tomorrow.
I don't want to do that.
I've got too much else going on that I want to do today.
I'm not going to submit to what God wants me to do today because I want to do what I want to do today.
What would have happened to that family?
The same thing that happened to every Egyptian family.
The firstborn would have died.
God's justice would have been done on that family.
Dear friend, if you're here this morning and you're not a believer, the message of the Bible is clear.
Today is the day of salvation.
Trust in the Lord.
His promises are good and his plans are for his glory and for our good.
And so this morning, if you're here and you have never trusted in him, may you see in this passage, God's goodness and his desire to redeem a people for himself.
And this morning, if you're here and you don't know what that's like, I challenge you to come talk to an elder after service.
Let me pray, Father.
Thank you for your word this morning.
God, thank you that you have, in your word, set forth a plan to redeem a people for yourself.
God, thank you that in this Passover text, God, we find just a shadow of what is to come on the cross.
God, thank you that what we see in Exodus, God, is a picture of the redemption that is to come for your people under the blood of your son.
God, thank you for, God, just the work you did in redeeming Israel so that you could bring your son to us on this earth.
God, thank you that you didn't do what was just that night.
God, thank you that you allowed the blood to satisfy you for a night.
But God also thank you that you didn't just make us continue to offer up perpetual sacrifices, but that you sent your son once for all, that there might be no more sacrifices, that he might be the perfect sacrifice so that everyone who calls upon his name shall be saved.
God, may we carry that message to our family and friends.
for your glory.
And may we be a part of building your kingdom here on the earth.
We pray this in your name.
Amen.
Thank you for listening to this sermon from Harvest Baptist Church.
For more information about the church, please visit our website harvestbc.church.
If you would like to contact us, please email us at contact.harvestbc.gmail.com or you can call us at 706-780-2211.
If you are looking for a church home or visiting the North Georgia area, we would love for you to join us on a Sunday morning.
at 9.30 in the fellowship hall for breakfast and Sunday school, and then at 11 a.m. for our Lord's Day worship service.
We hope that you have a great week.
God bless.